[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What does it mean
when someone says,
where are you from?
And where are you going?
My name is Randy Veitenheimer.
For the past 40 years, I have
been a student of human health
and historical, traditional,
and contemporary medicine.
The historical
medicine teachings
I use in my practice
centers around
Chinese energetic medicine
and Native American medicine.
Still, knowledge
of Western medicine
is vital for understanding
the experiences and issues
that people present as what they
are facing and need help with.
So in my work, I understand
people's conditions
from a Western point of view.
But to really diagnose
the root of the problem,
I'm able to calibrate the
energetic states and the energy
flow resulting in wherever
the condition lives.
This means I'm
able to access all
the dimensions in
which the client and/or
the condition might exist.
In this episode, I will explain
my theory of proximate reality
and how that can
help us be more aware
and knowledgeable about what we
are experiencing in our lives.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In 1989, I was practicing
a Kriya meditation,
which is a meditation that
combines focus, awareness,
mantras, and body positions.
In this meditation, I was
expanding my awareness.
And my awareness brought me to
my presence in the universe.
What I gathered
from this knowledge
was a theory that was able
to explain that reality
is everywhere that you are not.
You only occupy a very
small point of reality.
I called this the theory
of proximate reality.
So proximate reality
means that the center
of the universe, you, occupies
a very unique part of reality.
This theory explains that
your experiences are local.
And you are confined
to how far you
can reach with your presence.
Now, this reality
is situated away
from the center of the
universe, which is you.
You exist as the
point of attachment
to being yourself
in this reality.
The point of attachment
to this reality is you.
If you lose your point of
attachment, your body, you die.
So proximate reality is
the amount of reality
that you are in contact with
or have a relationship with.
So if you expand
your consciousness,
you are expanding the amount
of reality in your life.
So for example, if you are
living in Washington, DC,
it also means right
now, you do not
have a physical reality
in Dallas, Texas, which
means it doesn't exist for
you right now in your reality.
But your consciousness can
be anywhere in the universe.
You could switch your
presence in your mind,
meaning you can focus on
being in Dallas, Texas.
And in some degree, that
would mean you would be there.
However, it would not
be as strong as where
your body is in Washington, DC.
The body is the antenna and
non-consciously picking up
all this information.
So when you are
physically in one place
and you pick up information
from that reality,
it is only because it has
greater density of information.
The information
density is less when
you are in Dallas, Texas
with just your mind.
So when you are watching
a movie, for instance,
you are transported
into that consciousness.
And you forget where you
are in the world physically.
The movie theater disappears.
This is very similar.
So proximate reality allows
us to not be overwhelmed.
But it also limits the
information available to us
by restricting our
interactions with reality.
So it is an important
theory to explain
so that we may understand
how to co-create and become
more of ourselves and
have more presence
in the physical
reality we occupy,
which equals more
interactiveness.
So how do we co-create using
the proximate reality theory?
It is to bring
essence to presence.
It is to bring the entire
concept and unity of the self
to one moment.
This sounds simple.
But it is the basis for
meditation and contemplation.
This theory is
based on the ability
to increase or decrease the
elements of our reality.
So for instance, let's
say you're married.
And you're at work.
Where is your significant other?
Who cares?
You're at work.
And he or she is not here.
These are examples
of both realities
occurring at the same time, of
being in number one reality,
being present in
a physical sense,
and being in zero reality, in
a imaginative or experiential
sense.
So you have decreased
your information field
to focus on creating what
you're doing currently.
So to co-create your
reality requires
the presence of your
essence, yourself,
which we would
call consciousness.
So when you increase
presence, you
increase the intensity of
your experience of reality.
And that intensity can change
your proximate reality.
One of the paths is called
the path of negation.
And it is the path
where you decrease
the information coming to you.
But you intensify your
presence at the point
of attachment to
that reality, which
is your physical consciousness.
This is the duality
of reality and action.
This validates your
ability to be in one place
and then, again,
two places at once.
So for example, you want
to move to Dallas, Texas.
You're currently
in Washington, DC.
You use meditation techniques
to experience being in Dallas.
And we would call that intention
and imagination and fantasy
and a whole lot of other things.
But you would use
those techniques
to experience being
in Dallas to the point
that you feel you're
physically there.
This is the same
concept that is used
in the idea of
advancing oneself,
not only intellectually,
but spiritually.
This reality gets into
the zero and one duality,
the duality of reality.
Zero reality is the
mental, meditation,
and non-physical
aspects of existence.
And the number one reality
is everything physical.
That's why the
human existence is
based on the combination
of these two realities
and the point of contact, or
the attachment to being alive.
So let's say we've
never been to Dallas.
And we're imagining what it
would be like to live there.
This is all fantasy
until there is
movement in your mind in the
form of intent and actions.
Your mind can only get you so
far unless you're really good.
You need to marry
the zero reality
fantasy with your physical
number one reality.
In this case, it would
be getting on a plane
and going to Dallas to
check out where to live.
So zero reality sets your
mind on an attachment.
And now you need to catch
up with that reality
in number one, which is
to be physically there.
Now, there are people
that are that good.
There are people that are
so trained in zero reality
that they can get there
physically with only
using their mind.
Tibetan monks, and
it has been alluded
to in Native American
mythology also--
that this capacity exists.
What is alluded to in
the Egyptian embalming
practices is that
the pharaohs were
so good in doing
these types of things
that they could come back
to physical existence.
This was part of
their belief system.
And that is why
people preserved them.
How are these groups of
people able to do that?
They do this by projecting their
consciousness to another point
of physicality.
This takes years of
training of the mind
to be able to alter reality
with your consciousness.
So co-creating your
reality would first
start with being able
to alter your reality.
And you alter reality by
your own consciousness.
You see this in
movies, especially
"Star Wars," where the
Jedi is able to transfer
his physical body into a
battle scene somewhere else.
People take it to be fantasy,
but it's not exactly.
There are exercises that focus
on Kundalini yoga and Kriya
yoga that activate
the mind and the body
at the same time,
which increases
your awareness of
consciousness to be
interactive while,
at the same time,
decreases the
information coming in.
So you can co-create
the reality you want.
How do you balance the two?
It's important to not
get lost on either side
of zero or number one reality.
If you get lost in
number one reality,
you're totally focused
on the physical.
And you have no awareness,
no information coming in.
It's like you exist outside
of reality to a certain degree
because you're so focused
on the physicality of what
you're doing.
If you get lost in
zero reality, we
say you're lost in anxiety,
which doesn't exist,
or depression,
which doesn't exist.
They don't exist as a location.
They exist as something
you participate in.
So in the same way,
you participate
in either zero or
number one reality
to one degree or another.
The classic example
of this is if you
were texting and driving.
Driving is a physical action.
It requires all the
inputs of your senses.
And as soon as
you start texting,
you're into zero reality.
You're into that reality of the
thought and the imagination.
And people do not go back
and forth very easily.
There's a time lag.
Example of that is
when you daydream.
Somebody pokes you on the
shoulder and go, hey, hey, hey.
Where are you?
And you go, I was
somewhere else.
So when you're
texting and driving,
for instance, you're
somewhere else.
And that time lag can be deadly.
The first principle of
the martial arts I teach
is awareness.
The second principle of
the martial arts I teach
is balance.
You do not want to spend
too much time in either,
but be able to understand
how they work together
and move you forward.
This means meditation
mixed with movement.
It's very interesting because
it's not just martial arts.
Dance can be form of
meditation and movement.
Working can be a form of
meditation and movement
combined.
So a lot of people think it
has to be some exotic form
or have some exotic teacher.
But everyday activity
has the capacity
to be a meditation
and movement mix.
The third martial art I
teach is moment, which
means timing under heaven.
What's that mean?
We go from moment to moment.
Moment to moment is not time.
It's not seconds.
It's independent of time.
It is something that
relates to the movement
of our consciousness
through Heaven and Earth,
Earth being the physical
reality of existence
and Heaven being the meditative,
spiritual existence of reality.
I think it's the most
important thing of the things
I teach because every moment
gives you an opportunity.
You cannot account for
causality in reality.
If we ask, where
did you come from,
the answer is, well, I was born.
And I can tell you my
mother and father's name.
But if we start examining that
from a moment perspective,
it becomes very entertaining
because they had to meet.
They had to get together.
They had to be together
for you to be conceived.
It's like, what was
all the causality
that caused you to go somewhere
at a specific day and time?
And you met your
significant other.
You met your partner.
If you take all the
causality involved,
it's infinite because the other
person had to be there, too.
And not only that, the
place had to exist,
whether it was a church or a
bar or a park or anything else.
And then, well, wait a minute.
Their parents had to meet.
And this thing goes on
and on and on to the point
that it's just too
much information.
And causality disappears
under the weight of that.
And that is why we limit
the amount of information
that we participate in.
So a moment gives
you the opportunity
to move from where you
are to the next moment.
So one of the trainings
in moment martial arts
is learning the meaning of a
moment, knowing when to move
and when not to move.
The fourth martial art
I teach is movement.
It comes from a moment.
This is the mixture of
time, focus, and balance.
The fifth martial
art is momentum,
which means once you
head in that direction,
you keep moving
in that direction.
This goes into physics and
the laws of thermodynamics,
which states the tendency
for an object in motion
to stay in motion.
What's that mean?
Look at it from the standpoint
of if we break that momentum.
If you break that momentum, we
say, I don't know where I'm at.
I don't know what I'm doing.
Your momentum has been broken.
You have lost yourself.
Momentum is very
important in life
because we go to the same job.
We go home to the same place.
We tend to do the same things.
So momentum could also
be explained as habits.
And when we do those without
any kind of mindfulness,
then we are blind to the fact
that every moment provides us
with opportunity.
If we're aware of these
moments and our own momentum,
we could then
anticipate and also make
choices about where we go and
what we do with much more ease.
So this is why it is important
for people to understand,
because it shows that we
all have the potential
to change what is
going on in our lives
and by being ourselves.
So let's talk about the
point of attachment.
Your consciousness is attached
to your physical body.
In the same way,
number one reality
is your physical existence.
And your consciousness would
represent zero reality.
But your point of
attachment moves.
Some days, you're more physical.
Some days, you're more mental.
And as we move back and
forth, we create change.
We create change in our lives.
So paying attention,
focusing are
ideals that we use to
explain what we're doing
or how we're going
to do something.
But they're actually
insufficient to describe
the movement of that
which is you yourself.
So people use words
like "soul" or "spirit."
It depends on the
language you use.
But there is
something independent
of the physical existence.
There was a study done at
Harvard several years ago.
And it showed that
when you dream,
you take your
consciousness with you.
And what that means is your
senses are still operating.
And so those are dream states.
And those are the
same states that
occur when we use meditation
and projective consciousness.
So we have moved our
point of attachment.
But that point of attachment
is attached to our body
at some point.
In Hindu, it's called a Bindu
point, the point of attachment.
In a Japanese martial
arts, it's called Hara--
refers to where you are
centered in your body.
And it's very interesting that
you are centered in yourself.
You are balanced or you're not.
If your center of
your consciousness
is outside your body, you have
basically abandoned your body.
But we never abandon,
for the most part,
that which is our
attachment to life itself.
It is the primary directive
that we maintain this body
as much as possible because
it's our engine which
we use to interact with
all physical reality.
Without that
physical reality, we
have no particular basis to
experiencement because we
are absent our senses.
So when you're in a soul form
or spirit form, you can observe.
But you may not be
able to experience.
The reality of zero
is just as important
as the physical reality
that everybody experiences
and wants to relate to.
External martial
arts, which is what
people see in all the
movies, is external reality.
It's number one reality.
It's the physical.
But there is
another martial art.
And that is called
internal martial arts.
Internal martial arts equates
with meditation, contemplation,
and exploring the
universe that exists
as an experiential universe.
Now that we have gone through
how to balance the two,
understanding the
universe inside us
requires this balance.
Understanding this principle
of zero-one reality
will help you move
into healing yourself.
I am your host,
Randy Veitenheimer.
Stay tuned for the
next episode, where
we explore more fundamental
elements that help you get back
to your original self.